---
created: 2008-12-31 16:02:09 +0100
layout: redirect
layout_old: default
redirect_to: https://blog.mbirth.de/archives/2008/12/31/id3-tagging-album-art-on-the-fuze.html
tags:
- know-how
- hardware
- sandisk
- sansa
- fuze
- id3
- albumart
- tagging
title: ID3 tagging & Album Art on the FUZE
toc: false
updated: 2009-04-14 02:12:23 +0200
---

The FUZE does **<del>not</del>** (since firmware 1.2.26/2.2.26) support ID3v2.4. But it does support ID3v2.3 and as it appears not only in ISO-8859-1 encoding but also in UTF-16.


Genres
======

The FUZE seems to understand only a few Genres by ID which are listed in the firmware file:
*Blues, Classic Rock, Country, Dance, Disco, Funk, Grunge, Hip-Hop, Jazz, Metal, New Age, Oldies, Other, Pop, R&B, Rap,
Reggae, Rock, Techno, Industrial, Alternative, Ska, Death Metal, Pranks, Soundtrack, Euro-Techno, Ambient, Trip-Hop, Vocal,
Jazz+Funk, Fusion, Trance, Classical, Instrumental, Acid, House, Game, Sound Clip, Gospel, Noise, AlternRock, Bass, Soul,
Punk, Space, Meditative, Instrumental Pop, Instrumental Rock, Ethnic, Gothic, Darkwave, Techno-Industrial, Electronic,
Pop-Folk, Eurodance, Dream, Southern Rock, Comedy, Cult, Gangsta, Top 40, Christian Rap, Pop/Funk, Jungle, Native American,
Cabaret, New Wave, Psychadelic, Rave, Showtunes, Trailer, Lo-Fi, Tribal, Acid Punk, Acid Jazz, Polka, Retro, Musical,
Rock & Roll, Hard Rock*

E.g. EasyTag writes `(127)` for "Drum & Bass". Since the FUZE doesn't know this ID, it get's listed as "Unknown".

But if you enter "Drum and Bass" as the Genre in EasyTag, it gets written as Plaintext and thus appears on the player.


Album Art
=========

while playing
-------------

To show album art while playing, embed a JPEG-image of about 200x200 pixels and max. around 30 KiB. But these covers won't
show up while browsing the album list. If there's a `folder.jpg`, the player will still show the embedded album art.
If there's no embedded art but a `folder.jpg`, the latter will be shown.


while browsing Albums
---------------------

To make images appear there, put a file `folder.jpg` or `album art.jpg` in the folder of the specific album. (same constraints as for the embedded cover art)