---
created: 2009-07-18 01:08:21 +0200
layout: redirect
layout_old: default
redirect_to: https://blog.mbirth.de/archives/2009/07/18/jabberd2.html
tags:
- know-how
- software
- linux
title: jabberd2
toc: false
updated: 2009-07-18 12:01:50 +0200
---

The setup of [jabberd2](apt://jabberd2) is mostly straight-forward. Just install the package and all needed transports.
The change the config files in `/etc/jabberd2` to your needs, esp. the name/jid of the admin.


pyMSNt
======

Update
------

The most recent version is in a *Mercurial* repository at <https://sharesource.org/hg/pymsnt/summary>. There you can
download the `trunk` revision and replace the files in `/usr/share/pymsnt` with the new ones. You might also need to
add the new options from the `config-example.xml` to your `/etc/pymsnt.xml`. Afterwards restart the transport and you
should be set.

Timeout
-------

The MSN transport [pyMSNt](https://sharesource.org/hg/pymsnt/summary) is a bit picky.

If you get error messages like:

    Failed to connect to MSN servers: [Failure instance: Traceback (failure with no frames): <type 'exceptions.Exception'>: Timeout]

In the config file, if you are behind a NAT router, specify **your internal LAN IP** for `<host>` otherwise, it won't
work. Always check this setting first before digging for other possible errors.


PyYIMt
======

A Python Yahoo-Transport can be found at the [xmpppy](http://xmpppy.sf.net/). To install it, do the following:

1. create a directory `/opt/pyyimt/src` and put the contents of the `yahoo-transport-0.4.tar.gz` in it. You'll also need
   the `xmppy-0.5.0rc1.tar.gz` - put it into `/opt/pyyimt/src/xmpp`.
1. now modify the `config.py` to look at another place for the config file. Change the 4th line like this:  
  
        configFiles = ['config.xml', '../pyyimt.conf.xml', '/etc/pyyimt.conf.xml']

1. now copy the `config_example.xml` to `/opt/pyyimt/pyyimt.conf.xml` and modify it according to your needs.
   Also set the following values:
    * **spoolFile:** `../yahoouser.dbm`
    * **pid:** `../pyyimt.pid`
    * **debugFile:** `../yahooerror.log`
1. make the whole directory `/opt/pyyimt` and all files and sub-dirs belong to the group *jabber* and writable for
   that group.
1. use this init.d-script: [pyyimt.txt]({{ site.url }}/assets/pyyimt.txt)